This project assesses the development of black men in the United States prior to and after the enactment of the Thirteenth Amendment. Current literature and works are reviewed to understand the numerous ways in which black men were and are subject to enslavement and involuntary labor. While multiple data science methods were employed, archival research of historical records and survey data from black men in the United States were the most popular techniques used by researchers. Scholars have determined that black men made up a large majority of the southern penal system immediately following the abolishment of slavery via the Thirteenth Amendment, and that black men who endure everyday acts of discrimination are more likely to seriously come in contact with law enforcement. Considering these findings, it can be argued that the laws and institutions in the United States have enabled a slavery to modern slavery pipeline that has been pushing black men into prison and forcing them to work since the end of slavery. However, pre-existing research fails to devise a solution to this conduit. Similar to the survey discussed in this project, Americans can be surveyed about their attitudes towards the Thirteenth Amendment, and if a satisfactory majority of Americans are discontent with the law the state and federal governments can be petitioned to propose a constitutional amendment. It is imperative that this research is conducted immediately to put a stop to what is, essentially, modern slavery masked by the Thirteenth Amendment. 
