I don’t know a ton about self-driving cars and the realm of data science that is responsible for artificial intelligence but my basic opinion is that not everything has to be automated. I understand the want and desire to progress technology and I see the appeal behind self-driving cars but I don’t think that it needs to be widely implemented. There are people who have already established their careers as truck and delivery drivers, using self-driving vehicles to replace human workers is extremely selfish of major companies (what’s new). I’m aware that a major argument for self-driving vehicles is that they are better for the environment. I don’t understand why companies can’t take the money it would take to transition their delivery methods to fully automated and use it towards making their current vehicles more environmentally friendly, it’s probably cheaper that way. The only way it could be slightly justifiable other than improving the environment (which is questionable on its own) is if self-driving cars would be faster and more efficient at delivering goods and services, which I don’t see them being. It’s not like they can go any faster than regular drivers can, which sounds like a very non nuanced point but it really is that simple. Any streamlining that self-driving cars offer can be done by improving working conditions for truck and delivery drivers. If major companies are unhappy with the performance of their sentient workers, that is not cause for automation, that is cause for the company to reflect on the treatment of their workers. I don’t even think it would be cheaper, I think the price of manufacturing, widely implementing, and maintaining these vehicles over a long period of time would probably compare to the amount of money it takes to pay employees a liveable wage. I think self-driving cars are a great idea for personal use, but I don’t think they should be widely implemented because it's not fair to displace millions of employees for the sake of being futuristic. 
