The first thing that comes to my mind when I hear human development is the progression of life. However, you cannot have the progression of life without life itself. Whenever we do in-class essays that focus on examining data sets of our choosing, I am always drawn to analyzing maternal and fetal mortality rates in different countries for that exact reason. Of course, humans should always want to improve their quality of life, but I think before we do that we must focus on fostering a healthy and viable condition for fetuses and expecting mothers. In my other data science class I am currently writing a paper on how digital surveillance of maternal individuals’ data affects abortion legislation in the United States, and how that legislation affects maternal mortality rates; I know a lot about the topic and I honestly thinking focusing on ensuring the start of life would make a great foundation to build off of. Many people do not realize it, but there is actually a huge relationship between data and data science, and maternal and fetal health. Most of my personal research focuses on how abortion and fetal and maternal health are related, so I have a lot of resources on that, but I think for this class it would be better to just focus on fetal and maternal health. Unfortunately because this is not my personal realm of research, I don’t know any resources specifically related to just fetal and maternal health. It’s a relevant topic to discuss too because the United States has one of the worst maternal mortality rates out of the top developed countries worldwide, so discussions about it would probably be more engaging because it's an issue that affects a lot of people in our country. 
